# Experiment 7: Study of Loops in Python

Loops are built-in functions of Python that let us run a specific set of code multiple times without the need of writing it multiple times.

### Aim: 

To study the functions of loops in Python

### Tools Used:

Google Colab, Jupyter Notebook

### Theory:

#### Introduction: 

Loops are basically used in Python to repeat a set of code in Python without writing it many times. The number of times a loop is executed is called iterations. In Python, loops can be run either by the number of iterations known or unknown. 

There are two types of loops in Python:

              (i)For Loop:

              (ii) While Loop

## For Loops in Python

For loops in Python are used only when the number of iterations is known. The number of iterations can be defined by the range function. If the loop is run in any built-in data type in Python, then either the range function can be used or the in operator can be used to determine the length of the data type as the range of the loop.

**Range Function:**

The range function is usually used to specify the number of iterations in a for loop. It comes with 3 values, or in most cases it is only 2 values given to it.

The values are: 

    * Start Value:

    --> it determines the start of the loop

    --> If used inside a data type, then the index number where the loop must be started can be specified in this value.

    --> the default value of this is '0'

    * Stop Value:

    --> It determines the Stop value of the loop.

    --> If used inside the data type, either it is given as the length of the data type as the default value or any other value can be used to access the element at that particular index.

    * Step Value:

    --> It determines how many values must be skipped from the one that is printed in the last.

    --> The default value of this is '1.'

Examples:

           for i in range(5):

                    print("Apple")

## While Loop in Python

While loops in Python are used when the number of iterations is unknown. An appropriate variable must be defined beforehand with a value so that the loop is completed when the variable reaches a particular value. The variable must be incremented for every loop; if not done, then the loop will become an infinite loop.

An infinite loop is a type of loop where the loop keeps on running without a terminating condition.

Examples: 

            c = 0

            while (c < 5):

                  print("Apple")

                  c += 1

## Loop Control Statements:

* *break:*

  --> Stops the loop entirely and moves to the next block of code outside the loop.

* *continue:*

  --> Skips the current iteration and jumps straight to the next one.

* *pass:*

  --> A null statement. It does nothing; it's a placeholder for code you haven't written yet.

  

**Application of Loops:**

* Data Analysis and Science: Data scientists use loops to iterate through massive datasets.

* Web Scraping and Automation: Using a bot to track price drops or collect news headlines

* Game Development: For game engines (like Pygame), the game loop is the most critical concept. It is a while loop that runs indefinitely until the player quits.

* Web Development and APIs: In an e-commerce site, the "Product Grid" is generated by a loop.

**Advantages of Loops:**

* Code Reusability

* Automation of Repetitive Tasks

* Dynamic Handling of Data

**Learning Outcomes:**

* For loops are used when the number of iterations is known. It can be used with or without the range function.

* While loops are used when the number of iterations is unknown.

**Conclusion:**

Thus, various operations are performed using both the for and while loops, and the output is verified.
